---
navigation:
  url: /blog/what-happened-to-wheelroom
date: 2022-01-18T00:00+01:00
tags: ['blog']
topics:
  opener:
    heading: What happened to Wheelroom?
    abstract: Founded in 2018. Started to fly in 2020 and abandoned in 2021. What happened?
    icon: message-circle
    image: whatHappenedToWheelroom
  whatHappened:
    heading: About
    abstract: First there was Wheelroom. Then came the UI Library. This evolved into the Modelberry factory as we know it.
    icon: user
---
# Wheelroom

Modelberry is the successor of Wheelroom. The original Wheelroom repository is
[still online](https://github.com/wheelroom/wheelroom) as is an [archived
copy](https://github.com/jaccomeijer/wheelroom).

# Evolving models

Wheelroom was founded in 2018 with the idea that content models evolve as a code
base evolves and that models should be kept in the same repository as the code
base.

# React UI library

Early 2020 a React UI library was developed around the Wheelroom command line
utility. The Wheelroom boilerplate based on [GatsbyJs](https://www.gatsbyjs.com)
combined content from [Contentful](https://www.contentful.com) with the React UI
library into a marketing website on [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com) in a
matter of minutes.

# Success

Setting up a new site in a matter of minutes together with easy customization
and universal UI library made a marketing site based on Wheelroom an easy sell.

Where the Wheelroom command line utility was solid, the UI library had a number
of drawbacks.

# UI library drawbacks

The UI library was build around a [React
clone](https://github.com/jaccomeijer/styled-system) of [styled
system](https://styled-system.com). This design system served well for a while
but eventually evolved into the [Any
Element](https://github.com/modelberry/sites/blob/main/packages/any-element/README.md).

The biggest problem with the way styled system was used were the style trees. A
style tree was a Wheelroom concept which allowed styling a tree of components.

First of all it was hard to maintain the tree typings. Extending them with new
functionality was too complicated. The second problem was that the trees were
not as intuitive as they could be. Over time it became hard to remember which
style was defined where.

# New UI library

In 2021 a [new UI library](https://blue.modelberry.com) was developed with the
lessons learned. This library uses clear type: entry-hyperlink id:
5G2YXbJGjvlyOOrexOXlWU and a type: entry-hyperlink id: firstBlogPost that
prevents breaking changes. The library was separated from the command line
utility.

# Command line utility

The [Wheelroom command line
utility](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@wheelroom/wheelroom) uses a javascript
object for defining the content models. The content models could be pushed to
Contentful and were used to generate typescript definitions and graphql queries.

This worked well (as it still does), but there was a better way.

# Modelberry factory

Instead of generating typescript from a javascript object that defined the
content models, typescript now is at the core.

A new command line utility was born and was named '[Modelberry
factory](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@modelberry/mbfactory)'.

Content models are defined in typescript. [TSDoc](https://tsdoc.org) annotations
are used to add additional details to the models. This way models can be pushed
to Contentful. The other way around appeared easy as well. Pushing and pulling
content was an obvious next step.

---
